Tutankhamun: Anatomy of an Excavation.

Howard Carter's diaries and journals.

The first excavation season in the tomb of Tutankhamun.

Part 1: October 28 to December 31, 1922

© Griffith Institute, Oxford OX1 2LG

Concept and direction: Jaromir Malek

Transcript: Sue Hutchison

Editing: Elizabeth Fleming, Diana Magee, Ana I. Navajas Jimenez,
Jaromir Malek

Scanning: Hana Navrátilová

Image editing: Jenni Navratil

The diary and journal for 1922 have been scanned with the financial support
of the Manchester Ancient Egypt Society

[Note: all dates have been standardized.]

The first two books in which this excavation season is recorded are

small (19.5 by 12 cm) appointment books,

Lett's No. 46 Indian and

Colonial Rough Diaries 1922 (catalogued in the Griffith Institute Archive
as TAA Archive i.2.21) and 1923 (TAA Archive i.2.22), which contain only
the briefest of notes (these are given in italics in the transcript which
follows).

The third book is a large ring-binder (Walker's Loose-Leaf Books, 33
by 21.5 cm) entitled Notes, Diary, and Articles, Referring to
the Theban Royal Necropolis and the Tomb of Tutankhamen (TAA Archive
i.2.1). It contains extended entries written in ink. They are in Howard
Carter's own hand (except for those between December 6 and 27, 1922 which
are by A.C. Mace) on pages 25-53.

The transcript presented here has been only very slightly edited, for
example by correcting misspellings and eliminating duplication or omission
of words. For easier reading, such changes have not been marked but
scans of the pages of these diaries can now be seen by clicking on the
appropriate date.

Friday, October 27, 1922.

Left Cairo for Luxor.

Saturday, October 28, 1922.

Arrived Luxor - went on to Erment to see Callender.

Two donkeys.

Arrived Luxor on Saturday morning and took the 10am train to

Erement to see Callender,

living in his small house on the E. bank, near the river.

Stayed the night with him and on the 29th.

Sunday, October 29.

Returned, per boat 3 hours, to Gurna.

Two donkeys

Returned by small sailing boat to Gurna (3 1/2 hrs).

Tuesday, October 31.

Paid Salaries to date LE:9.

1 donkey.

Wednesday, November 1.

Commenced Excavations. B. el. M.

Commenced operations in the Valley of the Kings. I began by

continuing the former

excavation where it had stopped at the N.E. corner of the

entrance to the tomb of Ramses

VI, trenching southwards. At this point there were ancient

stone huts of the Necropolis

workmen, built rather less than a metre above the bed-rock,

which had partly been

exposed in our former work x (see plan L.M. 15 and 16). As we

uncovered them they

were found to continue under and in front of the entrance of

Ramses VI tomb in a

southerly direction and connected up with other similar huts

on the opposite side of the

valley bed discovered by Davis during previous work. These

ancient huts were soon

cleared of the rubbish covering them. I planned them, and

removed them for

investigation below, which undertaking took until the fourth

of Nov.

Note

x These huts were built upon the natural detritus, and were

covered by an average of three

metres of debris accumulated since their construction.

Saturday, November 4.

First steps of tomb found.

At about 10am I discovered beneath almost the first hut

attacked the first traces of the

entrance of the tomb (Tut.ankh.Amen) This comprised the first

step of the N.E. corner

(of the sunken-staircase). Quite a short time sufficed to

show that it was the beginning of

a steep excavation cut in the bed rock, about four metres

below the entrance of Ramses

VI's tomb, and a similar depth below the present level of the

valley. And, that it was of

the nature of a sunken staircase entrance to a tomb of the

type of the XVIIIth Dyn., but

further than that nothing could be told until the heavy

rubbish above was cleared

away.

This is how the same discovery was noted in Howard Carter's excavation

journal. Numbers 433-5 refer to the register of finds from Carnarvon-Carter

excavations in the Valley of the Kings, L.16 and M.16 are references to Carter's

map. The journal was discontinued after these entries.

Nov. 1, 1922.

Season 1922-23 begins: excavation before tomb of Ramses VI (vide L.M.16)

433. L.16 Entrance of tomb of

In bed rock floor of water-course (below entrance of Ramses VI). Discovered 4th Nov. 1922.

434. L.16 Limestone flake bearing polytheistic sketch in bl. & red of Horus & animals. (2 frags.)

435. L.16. Enclosure in stone upper stratum - (?) mortar trough for Ramses VI (?) tomb.

Sunday, November 5.

Discovered tomb under tomb of Ramses VI

Investigated same & found seals intact.

It took the whole of the preceding day and most of this day to

free this excavation before

the upper margins of the staircase could be demarcated on its

four sides. As first

conjectured it proved to be an opening (about 4 ms x 1.60 ms)

excavated in the bed-rock,

with its W. end abutting against the rock slope of the small

hillock in which Ramses VI

had excavated his tomb. As the work proceeded we found that

the western end of the

cutting receded under the slope of the rock, and thus was

partly roofed over by the

overhanging rock.

Towards sunset we had cleared down to the level of the 12th

step, which was sufficient to

expose a large part of the upper portion of a plastered and

sealed doorway. Here before

us was sufficient evidence to show that it really was an

entrance to a tomb, and by the

seals, to all outward appearances that it was intact.

I examined this exposed portion of the sealed doorway and

noticed that the only

decipherable impressions of the seals were those of the

well-known Royal Necropolis

seal, i.e., Anubis (symbolizing a king) over nine foes.

With the evidence of these seals, and the fact that the

workmen's huts, which in all

probabilities dated from the time of the construction of

Rameses VI's tomb, were built

over the mouth of the entrance of this newly discovered tomb

without apparently

disturbing it, it was clear that its content would be

undisturbed at least since the XXth

Dyn.

The seal-impressions suggested that it belonged to somebody of

high standing but at that

time I had not found any indications as to whom.

I noticed at the top of the doorway, where some of the

cement-like plaster had fallen

away, a heavy wooden lintel. To assure myself of the method

in which the doorway was

blocked, I made a small hole under this wooden lintel - the R.

hand corner, about 35 x 15

cms in size. By this hole I was able to perceive with the aid

of an electrical torch that a

passage beyond was completely filled with stones and rubble up

to its ceiling, which was

again evidence of something that had required careful closing.

It was a thrilling moment

for an excavator, quite alone save his native staff of

workmen, to suddenly find himself,

after so many years of toilsome work, on the verge of what

looked like a magnificent

discovery - an untouched tomb. With certain reluctance I

reclosed the small hole that I

had made, and returned to another careful search among the

seals to see if I could not

find some indication that would point to the identity of the

owner, but it was of no avail

for the small space bared by my excavation did not expose any

impression sufficiently

clear to be made out, other than that of the Royal Necropolis

seal already

mentioned.

Though I was satisfied that I was on the verge of perhaps a

magnificent find, probably

one of the missing tombs that I had been seeking for many

years, I was much puzzled by

the smallness of the opening in comparison with those of other

royal tombs in the valley.

Its design was certainly of the XVIIIth Dyn. Could it be the

tomb of a noble, buried

there by royal consent? Or was it a royal cache? As far as

my investigations had gone

there was absolutely nothing to tell me. Had I known that by

digging a few inches deeper

I would have exposed seal impressions showing Tut.ankh.Amen's

insignia distinctly I

would have fervently worked on and set my mind at rest, but as

it was, it was getting

late, the night had fast set in, the full moon had risen high

in the eastern heavens, I

refilled the excavation for protection, and with my men

selected for the occasion - they

like myself delighted beyond all expectation - I returned home

and cabled to Ld. C. (then

in England) the following message:-

"At last have made wonderful discovery in Valley a magnificent

tomb with seals intact

recovered same for your arrival congratulations "

Monday, November 6.

Townsend Arrives

House a/c to date 573.

56

Two donkeys

The men worked feverishly today covering and making safe the

discovery until the time

came for fully reopening . On the top of which great stones,

that formed the sides of

the ancient huts, were rolled.

Tuesday, November 7.

Two donkeys

The news of the discovery spread fast all over the country,

and inquisitive enquiries

mingled with congratulations from this moment became the daily

programme.

We continued clearing the bed-rock of the valley towards the

south where many more

huts were exposed and on turning the corner towards the west

we opened up, at a higher

level than the huts a sort of stone enclosure for mortar -

these like the others were

evidently part of the camp for Ramses VI tomb. This

investigation continued until the

end of the working week - Monday, the 13th Nov. Here, as I

found in most other cases,

the excavations of former explorers, in this case Davis, had

only skimmed the top surface

and had not even laid bare the huts of the ancient workmen.

Wednesday, November 8.

Townsend leaves.

Two donkeys

Received wireless from Lord C. "... possibly come soon ..." A

little later another wire

from Ld. C. "propose arrive Alexandria twentieth ..."

Thursday, November 9.

Wired for Callender.

Friday, November 10.

Callender arrived.

During the interim to following date made various preparations

for opening the

tomb.

Saturday, November 11.

Callender came

Two donkeys.

Sunday, November 12.

Two donkeys

Monday, November 13.

Two donkeys

Tuesday, November 14.

Two donkeys.

Wednesday, November 15.

Two donkeys

Thursday, November 16.

Two donkeys

Friday, November 17.

Pay men.

Fuel.

Callender leaves.

Two donkeys

Saturday, November 18.

Cement

Leave for Cairo.

Two donkeys

200

Left for Cairo.

Monday, November 20.

Wood. Zeers. Nails.

Lord C. and Lady E. arrived Cairo.

Made various purchases in Cairo.

Tuesday, November 21.

Callender arrives 5.pm. Abou Sukar.

Camel & donkey.

Left Cairo

Returned to Luxor

Wednesday, November 22.

Self & Ld. C.

Arrived Luxor

Arrived Luxor-Gurna

Ld C. left Cairo for Luxor.

Thursday, November 23.

Carpenter.

Ld C. arrived

Callender commenced opening tomb

Went up with Ld C to Valley

Lord C. arrived Luxor, came over to Gurna and put up at my

house.

Callender restarted uncovering tomb.

Friday, November 24.

Lady E. arrived.

and brought bird.

Arrived at entrance doorway

Engelbach came with some friends

Brunton, daughter of Lady A.'s sister, Mr Burton & ?someone

else.

Slept night at tomb.

Took photos. & notes.

Lady E. arrived.

Callender reached as far as the first doorway. There proved to

be sixteen steps.

Now that the whole of the sealed doorway was laid bare various

seal impressions bearing

the cartouche of Tut-ankh-Amen were

discernible, more in particular in

the lower portion of the plastering of the doorway where the

impressions were

clearest.

In the upper part of this sealed doorway traces of two

distinct reopenings and

successive reclosings were apparent, and that the

seal-impressions first noticed, Nov. 5,

of the Royal Necropolis - i.e., `Anubis over Nine Foes', had

been used for the

reclosing . Here was evidence of at least the reign of the

tomb, but its true significance

was still a puzzle, for in the lower rubbish that filled the

stair-case entrance we found

masses of broken potsherds, broken boxes, the latter bearing

the names and protocol of

Akhenaten, Smenkh-Ka-Ra, and Tut.ankh.Amen, and with what was

even more upsetting

a scarab of Tehutimes III, as well as a fragment bearing the

cartouche of Amenhetep III.

These conflicting data led us for a time to believe that we

were about to open a royal

cache of the El Amarna branch of the XVIIIth Dyn. Monarchs,

and that {the} from the

evidence mentioned above it had been probably opened and used

more than once.

Engelbach, the Chief Inspector Antiquities Dept., came and

witnessed the freeing of

rubbish from the first doorway. With him came several of his

friends, among others

Brunton.

Slept the night in the valley. Carpenters commenced upon

making a temporary wooden

grill for fixing over first doorway.

Saturday, November 25.

Opened first door.

Noted seals. Made photographic records, which were not, as

they afterwards proved,

very successful. Opened the first doorway; which comprised

rough stones built up from

the threshold to the lintel, plastered over on the outside

face, and covered with numerous

impressions from various seals of Tut.ankh.Amen and the Royal

Necropolis seal. The

removal of this blocking exposed the commencement of a

completely blocked descending

passage, the same width as the entrance staircase and rather

more than 2 metres high. It

was filled with its local stone and rubble, probably from its

own excavation, but like the

doorway it showed distinct traces of more than one filling;

the mass of the filling being of

clean white stone chips mingled with dust, while in the upper

left hand corner a large

irregular hole had been pierced through it which had been

refilled with dark flint and

chert stones. This coincided with reopenings and successive

reclosings found on the

sealed doorway.

As we cleared the passage we found mixed with the rubble

broken potsherds, jar seals,

and numerous fragments of small objects; water skins lying on

the floor together with

alabaster jars, whole and broken, and coloured pottery vases;

all pertaining to some

disturbed burial, but telling us nothing to whom they belonged

further than by their type

which was of the late XVIIIth Dyn. These were disturbing

elements as they pointed

towards plundering.

Sunday, November 26.

Open second doorway

about 2pm.

Advised Engelbach.

After clearing 9 metres of the descending passage, in about

the middle of the afternoon,

we came upon a second sealed doorway, which was almost the

exact replica of the first.

It bore similar seal impressions and had similar traces of

successive reopenings and

reclosings in the plastering. The seal impressions were of

Tut.ankh.Amen and of the

Royal Necropolis, but not in any way so clear as those on the

first doorway. The

entrance and passage both in plan and in style resembled

almost to measurement the tomb

containing the cache of Akhenaten discovered by Davis in the

very near vicinity; which

seemed to substantiate our first conjecture that we had found

a cache.

Feverishly we cleared away the remaining last scraps of

rubbish on the floor of the

passage before the doorway, until we had only the clean sealed

doorway before us. In

which, after making preliminary notes, we made a tiny breach

in the top left hand corner

to see what was beyond. Darkness and the iron testing rod

told us that there was empty

space. Perhaps another descending staircase, in accordance to

the ordinary royal Theban

tomb plan? Or may be a chamber? Candles were procured - the

all important tell-tale for

foul gases when opening an ancient subterranean excavation - I

widened the breach and

by means of the candle looked in, while Ld. C., Lady E, and

Callender with the Reises

waited in anxious expectation.

It was sometime before one could see, the hot air escaping

caused the candle to flicker,

but as soon as one's eyes became accustomed to the glimmer of

light the interior of the

chamber gradually loomed before one, with its strange and

wonderful medley of

extraordinary and beautiful objects heaped upon one

another.

There was naturally short suspense for those present who

could not see, when Lord

Carnarvon said to me `Can you see anything'. I replied to him

Yes, it is wonderful. I

then with precaution made the hole sufficiently large for both

of us to see. With the light

of an electric torch as well as an additional candle we looked

in. Our sensations and

astonishment are difficult to describe as the better light

revealed to us the marvellous

collection of treasures: two strange ebony-black effigies of a

King, gold sandalled,

bearing staff and mace, loomed out from the cloak of darkness;

gilded couches in strange

forms, lion-headed, Hathor-headed, and beast infernal;

exquisitely painted, inlaid, and

ornamental caskets; flowers; alabaster vases, some beautifully

executed of lotus and

papyrus device; strange black shrines with a gilded monster

snake appearing from within;

quite ordinary looking white chests; finely carved chairs; a

golden inlaid throne; a heap

of large curious white oviform boxes; beneath our very eyes,

on the threshold, a lovely

lotiform wishing-cup in translucent alabaster; stools of all

shapes and design, of

both common and rare materials; and, lastly a confusion of

overturned parts of chariots

glinting with gold, peering from amongst which was a

mannikin. The first impression

of which suggested the property-room of an opera of a

vanished civilization. Our

sensations were bewildering and full of strange emotion. We

questioned one another as

to the meaning of it all. Was it a tomb or merely a cache? A

sealed doorway between

the two sentinel statues proved there was more beyond, and

with the numerous cartouches

bearing the name of Tut.ankh.Amen on most of the objects

before us, there was little

doubt that there behind was the grave of that Pharaoh.

We closed the hole, locked the wooden-grill which had been

placed upon the first

doorway, we mounted our donkeys and return home contemplating

what we had

seen.

Advised the Chief Inspector of the Antiquities Department, who

was with us at the

commencement of the opening of the first doorway, and asked

him to come as soon as

possible, preferably the following afternoon to enable us to

prepare an electrical

installation for careful inspection of this extraordinary and

pleasing discovery.

Monday, November 27.

Inspected tomb with electric light.

Ibrahim Effendi came

Callender prepared the electrical installation for lighting

the tomb. This was ready by

noon, when Lord C., Lady E., Callender and self entered and

made a careful inspection

of this first chamber (afterwards called the Ante-chamber).

In the course of the afternoon the local Inspector Ibrahim

Effendi, of the Department of

Antiquities at Luxor, came in the place of the Chief Inspector

- he being absent on a visit

to Kena.

It soon became obvious that we were but on the threshold of

the discovery. The sight

that met us was beyond anything one could conceive. The

heterogeneous mass of

material crowded into the chamber without particular order, so

crowded that you were

obliged to move with anxious caution, for time had wrought

certain havoc with many of

the objects, was very bewildering. Everywhere we found traces

of disorder caused by

some early intruder, objects over-turned, broken fragments

lying upon the floor, all added

to the confusion, and the unfamiliar plan of tomb repeatedly

caused us to ask ourselves in

our perplexity whether it was really a tomb or a Royal Cache?

As the better light fell

upon the objects we endeavoured to take them in. It was

impossible. They were so

many. Beneath one of the couches, the Thoueris couch in the

S.W. corner, we perceived

an aperture in the rock-wall which proved to be nothing less

than another sealed-doorway

broken open as by some predatory hand. With care Ld. C. and I

crept under this strange

gilded couch, and we peered into the opening. There we saw

that it led into yet another

chamber (afterwards called the Annexe) of smaller dimensions

than the Ante-chamber and

of a lower level. Even greater confusion prevailed here, the

very stones that blocked the

entrance, forced in when the breach was made, were lying

helter-skelter upon the objects

on the floor crushed by their weight. It was full of one mass

of furniture. An utter

confusion of beds, chairs, boxes, alabaster and faience vases,

statuettes, cases of peculiar

form, and every sort of thing overturned and searched for

valuables. The remaining

portions of the plaster covering the blocking of this doorway

bore similar seal-impressions

as on the other doorways.

In neither of these two chambers could we see any traces of a

mummy or mummies - the

one pious reason for making a cache. With such evidence, as

well as the sealed doorway

between the two guardian statues of the King, the mystery

gradually dawned upon us.

We were but in the anterior portion of a tomb. Behind that

closed doorway was the

tomb-chamber, and that Tut.ankh.Amen probably lay there in

all his magnificent

panoply of death - we had found that monarch's burial place

intact save certain

metal-robbing, and not his cache.

We then examined the plaster and seal-impressions upon the

closed doorway. They were

of many types of seals, all bearing the insignia of the King.

We also discovered that in

the bottom part of the blocking a small breach had once been

made, large enough to

allow of a small man to pass through, but it had been

carefully reclosed, plastered and

sealed. Evidently the tomb beyond had been entered - by

thieves! Who knows? But

sufficient evidence to tell that someone had made ingress.

The results of our investigations were, (1) it was clear the

place was Pharaoh's tomb

and not a mere cache; (2) that we had only entered the

anterior chambers of the tomb,

filled with magnificent equipment equal only to the wealth and

splendour of the New

Empire; (3) that we had found a royal burial little disturbed

save hurried plundering at the

hands of ancient tomb robbers.

It was a sight surpassing all precedent, and one we never

dreamed of seeing. We were

astonished by the beauty and refinement of the art displayed

by the objects surpassing all

we could have imagined - the impression was overwhelming.

Tuesday, November 28.

(?) Engelbach came.

Most of this day was spent in preparing for an official

opening of the tomb to take place

on the morrow - the 29th. Engelbach, the Chief Inspector,

returned from Kena by the

midday train, came over to the Valley on his motor-cycle in

the afternoon and inspected

the discovery.

Wednesday, November 29.

(?) Official opening

Today we had a sort of official opening to which the following

guests were invited:

Lady Allenby and AdC; H.E. Abdel Aziz Bey Yehia, the Mudir of

Kena; the Maamur of

Luxor; Mr and Mrs Maudsley; Mr and Mrs K. Boyde; Mr and Mrs de

Garis Davies; Mr

and Mrs Engelbach; Lady Downes and daughter; Abdel Razik Bey

of the Mus. of

Agriculture; Mr and Mrs Merton of the Times; Mr and Mrs

Brunton; The Irrigation Insp.

of Kena district; Wise Bey of the Police; the Commandant of

the Kena Police;

Ibreheem Effendi, Insp. of Luxor; and others. Lunch was given

12.30 at the head of the

valley - near tomb No. 15, when afterwards Lady Allenby and

H.E. the Mudir of Kena

with Ld. C. and self opened the tomb. A special report to The

Times was sent to Luxor

by runner - about 3pm.

Thursday, November 30.

Paid Salaries up to date

Excepting Abd el Aal.

(?) Lacau & Tottenham came.

A number of Egyptian notables of Luxor came early in the

morning and requested to be

allowed to see the interior of the tomb. We were totally

unprepared for such a large

quantity of visitors, and in view of the preservation of the

antiquities they being very

crowded and in poor preservation, we were obliged to refuse

admission until some

preparation was made to safeguard the objects.

Lacau and Tottenham, who were unable to be present at the

official opening yesterday,

arrived today, about 11am, and made their official inspection.

Both were very pleased

and I might say astonished at the discovery - Lacau

particularly so and very enthusiastic.

They remained to lunch and talked over various matters in

connection with the find.

Tottenham spoke very appreciatively of our achievement, and

went so far to say that he

would endeavour to see that Ld C. should be fully recompensed

for his good work and

enterprise, and that he thought it the duty of the Eg. Gov. to

give him all aid in

completing the undertaking.

Friday, December 1.

Ld. C. received letter from Tottenham to the above effect.

(see file Dec. 1). Measured doorway for steel gate.

Saturday, December 2.

Lady E. left for Cairo.

Sunday, December 3.

Refilled entrance of Tomb, using heavy boards to close the

doorway prior to covering

with stone rubble .

Monday, December 4.

Ld. C. left for Cairo.

Paid up men for the week.

Ld. C. left for Cairo.

Tuesday, December 5.

Made drawing for steel gate for inner doorway of

tomb.

Measured door for steel gate.

Wednesday, December 6.

To Cook 4 LE. on a/c.

Left for Cairo.

Left for Cairo

Thursday, December 7.

Arrived Cairo

Ordered from Rostaing steel gate for inner doorway of

tomb.

Purchased wadding & calico.

for transport and packing of antiquities,

Ordered nests of cardboard boxes.,

Stationery etc. and bandages.

Ordered steel gate

Purchased 32 bolts calico

Motor car

Photographic material

197 sheets wadding = 1970 yards

Bandages

Chemicals

etc. etc

In answer to Lythgoe's cable of congratulation asked if

Burton's services could be lent to

take photographs.

Friday, December 8.

Lythgoe replied

"Only too delighted to assist in any possible way. Please

call on Burton and any other

members of our staff cabling Burton to that effect."

Saturday, December 9.

Saw Lucas in regard of chemical preparations for preserving

objects, and

textiles.

Saw Lucas, Director of Chemical Dept. of Egyptian Government,

and he offered services

for winter

Monday, December 11.

Ld. C. left for England & Lady E.

Lord C. left for England.

Tuesday, December 12.

Cable from Mace offering services.

Wednesday, December 13.

Left for Luxor

Steel gate sent to Luxor.

Steel gates completed

Left for Luxor

Thursday, December 14.

Returned Gurna.

Friday, December 15.

Transport of door & materials.

Materials arrived & steel gate transported to Valley.

Saturday, December 16.

Opened tomb

Write Tile re tomb.

Reopened tomb

Sunday, December 17.

Fixed gate.

Fixed steel gate

Monday, December 18.

Breasted came 3 pm.

Breasted arrived & examined seals.

Burton, Hauser & Hall began work.

Lord C. arranged with Gardiner in England to look after

philological end of work

Tuesday, December 19.

Breasted. Came this morning examined seal impressions on

first and second

doorway as well as started upon doorway of the entrance to

sepulchral

chamber.

Wednesday, December 20.

Lucas arrived.

Inform Luxor notables of Friday.

Lucas arrived and began experiments on 21st. Also made

inspection of tomb from

criminological investigation point of view

Permission from Government to use Tomb no. 15 as

laboratory.

Thursday, December 21.

Tile to lunch.

Lucas started upon chemical tests for preserving textiles

etc.

Write Maudsley

Lucas made careful inspection of tomb from a criminological

point of view.

Friday, December 22.

Tomb open to European and Egyptian press at 4pm also for

notables.

Tomb opened to European and Egyptian Press by invitation. Also

to Egyptian notables of

Luxor

Saturday, December 23.

Write Maudsley

Write Allenby

Photographing and planning

Sunday, December 24.

Photographing and planning

Monday, December 25.

Fuel must be obtained

Mace arrived

Mace arrived

Tuesday, December 26.

Mace inspected interior of tomb.

Inspected tomb with Mace & discussed plan of campaign.

Wednesday, December 27.

Fuel.

Started removing objects. from Ante-chamber - commencing with

box No. 21.

Ahmed Ali Sofragi came.

Notes to Mace to this date May 17 1923

First object (Box 21) removed from Tomb.

Friday, December 29.

Contesa/See Bradstreet Merton re photos & offers./copies of

photos

Sunday, December 31.

Write Gardiner.

Photos of self.

White & Fitzgerald to lunch.

This text has also been published in Discussions

in Egyptology 32 (1995), but the electronic version has

been revised and updated.

(October 6, 2010)

Go to the excavation diaries for

early 1923.

Back to Tutankhamun: Anatomy of an

Excavation.